# Olfactory Reasoning

Most of what we consider rational thinking involves visual metaphors, and to a lesser extent, oral metaphors. That is, when we analyze some aspect of the world in a value-free way, we usually conceptualize it with patterns of thought that work well for visible objects or human speech, but less so for other senses, such as touch and smell.

## Sights

The primary mental model for most of the physical sciences and data science is a vector space. Most data can be described as some sort of table, in which each row of the table is an entity and each column is an attribute of that entity. These can be imagined as _N_ points in an _M_-dimensional space, in which _N_ is the number of rows and _M_ is the number of columns of the table. One row is called a vector, and a collection of vectors can be visualized by picking 2 or 3 dimensions and drawing them as a scatter-plot. A model of a real-world mechanism, purported to give rise to the data, is a function from any _M_-dimensional point to a probability, which we can draw by coloring the page behind the data. If most of the data points lie on top of the model's high-probability color, then the model is a good "fit" to the data.

The visual metaphor should be immediately apparent: data—whatever they represent—have become geometry. Every attribute has become a length, which is to say, a real-valued number. If we want to compare the same attribute of any two data points, or any two attributes expressed in the same units, we can align a ruler with each attribute's axis and read off the distance with as much precision as we need.

A vector space has many things in common with physical space, though physical space has only three dimensions. (Including time complicates things for reasons that aren't relevant for this argument.) As noted above, each of the vector's components has a continuously scalable length, just as a ruler has a length, and vectors can also be rotated as a ruler can be rotated in space, such that the horizontal and vertical axes can be replaced with diagonal axes. When held at a diagonal, a ruler has the same length that it had when held horizontally. Mathematically, that length is the square root of the sum of the squares of each of the vector's components—an operation that presumes that you _can_ add the values of components to each other, that it's legal to do so. As long as everything in the table is expressed as a real number in some units, it is legal to do so.

As the sciences developed over the past few centuries, data came to be cast more and more as tables of numbers and drawn as charts. An early example of this was William Playfair's 1786 _Commercial and Political Atlas_, which introduced line graphs, bar graphs, and area charts by analogy to cartographic maps—an explicit metaphor of space. Quantifying objects of study as numbers in tables and visualizing them as charts has by now become so strongly associated with rational thinking that the connection is usually implicit.

## Sounds

Some aspects of rational thought don't fit this model, but many of them fit a model derived from human speech and music instead. Human hearing is sensitive to an almost continuous range of pitches, but we nevertheless force them into categorically distinct pitches when we make or listen to music: notes conform to a scale. Different cultures have different scales, and one culture's notes might be "micro-tones" when measured on another culture's scales, but all traditional music locks into some set of distinguishable pitches. Similarly, human speech can make use of wide variety of sounds, and yet we cluster sounds into distinguishable phonemes with standardized vowel formants, intonation, voicing, lengths of aspiration, and place of articulation. Different languages have completely different sets of phonemes, but within a language, there are sharp boundaries: "b" and "bet" need to be distinguishable from "p" and "pet." Oral reasoning tends to be categorical.

Visual data is sometimes categorical, especially when it consists of a small number of sharply contrasting colors, like different kinds of fruits that stand out from the background leaves. But language analogies are more often our source of metaphors when we want to analyze categorical data.

For instance, when reasoning about integers (whole numbers), we conceptualize them as words, rather than lengths in space. The sequence of words known as counting—"one, two, three, four, five..."—is a kind of prose poem that corresponds with numbers through a one-to-one relationship. "One duck" means "🦆," "two ducks" means "🦆🦆," "three ducks" means "🦆🦆🦆," and so on. Although no one has ever uttered it, this prose poem has rules that describe how it continues to very high numbers: "million, billion, trillion, quadrillion, quintillion, sextillion, septillion, octillion, nonillion, decillion, undecillion, duodecillion, etc." provide a vocabulary for ever-increasing scales (derived from Latin prefixes), and there are rules for constructing and interpreting a number like "five quadrillion, two million and seventeen." The decimal form of a number, such as "5,000,002,000,017", is also linguistic: it has a vocabulary of ten digit-words, a very simple grammar, and a rule for associating any such sequence with a numerical concept.

Just as European mathematics had an emphasis on geometry, influenced by Euclid's _Elements_, Indian mathematics had an emphasis on number theory and combinatorics, influenced by Pingala and other mathematicians who were more interested in poetry than shapes. Pingala's _Chandaḥśāstra_ (on prosody) counts the number of possible poetic forms using combinatorial algorithms, introducing binary numbers to represent patterns of short and long syllables, as well as recursion and what we call Pascal's Triangle and Fibonacci Numbers (in the 3rd‒2nd century BCE). Ancient Indian mathematics emphasized combinatorics, number theory, algebra, and algorithms (both "al"s from from India through Arabic), making up what today call discrete mathematics. It was also much more oral: whereas Niccolò Tartaglia felt compelled to draw interlocking shapes to describe his solution to the cubic equation in 1545, Indian mathematicians relied more heavily on spoken and memorized sequences. For instance, Madhava of Sangamagrama (1340‒1425 CE) computed sine and cosine tables that were then memorized using a mnemonic system of associating digits with spoken syllables (the Katapayadi system).
